Revise language on Positron docs (#78)
posit-dev/positron-docs: assistant.qmd

We use tool-calling heavily within Positron to allow the LLMs to directly interact with Positron's novel data science features. We have built out key integration points that allow the LLM to parse and interact with the current state of the Positron IDE, and will continue to expand these capabilities over time.  

A few examples of these integration points include Positron's:  

- Variables pane, providing names, dimensions, and column names of dataframes and Python/R based database connections, as well as metadata for arrays, lists, and other objects in memory  
- Plots pane for describing the current plot or suggesting variations and next steps for iterating on the current plot  
- Console, available to the model for viewing inputs and code outputs, as well as allowing the user or an AI agent to execute code in the console and view the output

> - Session state, proving what language is active in the console session (R or Python, including version), what packages are loaded, and what packages are installed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Session state, providing what language is active in the console session (R or Python, including version), what packages are loaded, and what packages are installed
```

All of that Positron-specific context is in addition to the core capabilities of what traditional software-oriented GenAI clients have (active files, selected lines of code, files in project, training data in the model, etc).

## Get started

The general steps to use Positron Assistant are:

1. [Enable Positron Assistant in the settings](#enabling-positron-assistant)

1. [Ensure you have access to at least one API key or login method for a language model provider](#language-model-provider-api-keys-authentication)

1. [Sign into at least one language model provider](#configuring-positron-assistant)

1. [Use the chat pane, inline chat, or completions in the editor to interact with the language models](#using-positron-assistant)

## Enabling Positron Assistant

Positron Assistant is not enabled by default. Follow these steps to enable it:

> 1. Run the command `Preferences: Open User Settings (UI)` in the Command Palette to open user settings
> 
> 1. Search for the setting `positron.assistant.enable` and check the box for ["Positron > Assistant: Enable"](positron://settings/positron.assistant.enable) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Enable the [`positron.assistant.enable` setting](positron://settings/positron.assistant.enable).
```

With this link, the person doesn't have to open their settings ahead of time. Try it out here:

<https://deploy-preview-78--positron-posit-co.netlify.app/assistant.html#enabling-positron-assistant>

Author: Nice!

> 1. Restart Positron or run the `Developer: Reload Window` command in the Command Palette.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Restart Positron or run the _Developer: Reload Window_ command in the Command Palette.
```

### Managing language model providers

Anthropic and GitHub Copilot are the currently supported language model providers for Positron Assistant. Anthropic Claude is available for sidebar chat and inline chat, while GitHub Copilot is available for inline code completions only.

#### Adding language model providers

1. Run the _Positron Assistant: Add Language Model_ command to open the language model provider dialog. You can also click the "Add Language Model provider" button in the Positron Assistant chat area (note: the button may be collapsed within the `...` context menu).  

1. Select the model provider you want to add and authenticate with the API key or OAuth flow as required by the provider.

1. Once authenticated successfully, the "Sign in" button will change to "Sign out", and available models from the provider will be registered.

1. Click the "Done" button once you have added all the desired model providers. You can always come back to this dialog later to add or remove providers.

> ::: {.callout-tip}
> 1. Run the _Positron Assistant: Add Language Model_ command to open the language model provider dialog. You can also click the "Add Language Model provider" button in the Positron Assistant chat area (note: the button may be collapsed within the `...` context menu).
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This is duplicated, right?

 
Code generated by Assistant can be run in the Console, copied to the clipboard, or sent to the Editor via controls attached to code output blocks.

#### Slash commands

Slash commands provide quick access to common tasks without writing long prompts. Start by typing / in the chat box to see available commands. For example, the `/quarto` command converts the current chat conversation into a Quarto document.

#### Chat participants
Assistant's Chat pane (in the Activity Panel by default) has access to your R and Python console session inputs/outputs, as well as in-memory objects and dataframes as available in the variables pane. Assistant can look at the Plots pane too, if instructed. The user can attach files via the <kbd>@</kbd> icon or drag files as attachments to ask questions about specific files.

Chat participants provide specialized knowledge to the Positron Assistant. You can add a chat participant by typing `@` in the Chat pane plus the chat participant name. Please reference the [Shiny Assistant](#shiny-assistant) section for more information on the use of a Shiny chat participant.

### Inline chat

> The command `Inline Chat: Editor Inline Chat` (default keybinding: <kbd>Cmd + I</kbd>) will open a mini chat right in the editor. This is very useful for asking questions in context, and also includes a good UX for integrating changes suggested by the model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The command _Inline Chat: Editor Inline Chat_ (default keybinding: <kbd>Cmd/Ctrl</kbd>+</kbd>I</kbd>) will open a mini chat right in the editor. This is very useful for asking questions in context, and also includes a good UX for integrating changes suggested by the model.
```

### Completions

If GitHub Copilot is enabled and the user pauses typing for a few seconds, Positron Assistant will offer completions in most contexts. If it is not working, check the following:

- Make sure you have a [language model provider added](#adding-language-model-providers) for completions.

> - Check the [developer tools console logs](troubleshooting.qmd#developer-tools) to see if there are any errors logged. Run the `Developer: Toggle Developer Tools` command in the Command Palette to open DevTools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check the [developer tools console logs](troubleshooting.qmd#developer-tools) to see if there are any errors logged.
```

---
title: "Positron Assistant"
---

::: {.callout-note}

The Positron Assistant is currently an experimental feature in Positron, available in 2025.06.0-167 and beyond. We are actively improving the user experience and functionality, so please provide [feedback](https://github.com/posit-dev/positron/discussions) and [report any issues](https://github.com/posit-dev/positron/issues/new/choose) you encounter.

:::

> Positron Assistant is an AI client that provides LLM integration within Positron, both for chat and for inline completions. Use Positron Assistant to generate code, ask questions, get help with debugging, refactor, and get suggestions for next steps in your data science projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Positron Assistant is an AI client that provides LLM integration within Positron, both for chat and for inline completions. Use Positron Assistant to generate or refactor code, ask questions, get help with debugging, and get suggestions for next steps in your data science projects.
```

## Why use Positron Assistant over other AI clients?

> The Positron Assistant offers novel data science and Positron-specific context compared to other IDE AI tooling. We provide a data science centric IDE for the user and allow the LLM to interact with the most important parts of Positron to get better context for better results!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Positron Assistant offers novel data science and Positron-specific context compared to other IDE AI tooling. We provide a data-science-centric IDE for the user and allow the LLM to interact with the most important parts of Positron to get better context for better results!
```

> A majority of data science work happens interactively with live data during development. Users load local or remote data, seek to understand it via cleaning, transformations, visualizations and modeling and ultimately generate reproducible code. While the full code on disk is the ultimate source of truth and gives you the ability to reproduce the results, the ephemeral state is where a data scientist is actually working the majority of the time. As such, existing AI clients that only have access to the code on disk are limited in their ability to provide useful suggestions and context-aware completions for data science.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A majority of data science work happens interactively with live data during development. Users load local or remote data, seek to understand it via cleaning, transformations, visualizations, and modeling, then ultimately generate reproducible code. While the full code on disk is the ultimate source of truth and gives you the ability to reproduce the results, the ephemeral state is where a data scientist is actually working the majority of the time. As such, existing AI clients that only have access to the code on disk are limited in their ability to provide useful suggestions and context-aware completions for data science.
```

> We are using tool-calling heavily within Positron to allow the LLMs to directly interact with Positron's novel data science features. We have built out key integration points that allow the LLM to understand and interact with the current state of the Positron IDE, and will continue to expand these capabilities over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use tool-calling heavily within Positron to allow the LLMs to directly interact with Positron's novel data science features. We have built out key integration points that allow the LLM to parse and interact with the current state of the Positron IDE, and will continue to expand these capabilities over time.
```

This is nitpicky, but I do think we should try to avoid overly anthropomorphizing language.

> A few examples include:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A few examples of these integration points include Positron's:  
```

- Variables pane, providing names, dimensions, and column names of dataframes and Python/R based database connections, as well as metadata for arrays, lists, and other objects in memory  

> - Plots pane for describing the current plot or suggesting variations, next steps on iterating on the current plot  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Plots pane for describing the current plot or suggesting variations and next steps for iterating on the current plot  
```

> - Console is available by the model for viewing inputs and code outputs, as well as allowing the user or an AI agent to execute code in the console and view the output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Console, available to the model for viewing inputs and code outputs, as well as allowing the user or an AI agent to execute code in the console and view the output
```

> - Session state, i.e., what language is active in the console session? R or Python? What version? What packages are loaded? What packages are installed?  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Session state, proving what language is active in the console session (R or Python, including version), what packages are loaded, and what packages are installed
```

## Get started

The general steps to use Positron Assistant are:

1. [Enable Positron Assistant in the settings](#enabling-positron-assistant)

1. [Ensure you have access to at least one API key or login method for a language model provider](#language-model-provider-api-keys-authentication)

1. [Sign into at least one language model provider](#signing-into-language-model-providers)

1. [Use the chat pane, inline chat, or completions in the editor to interact with the language models](#using-positron-assistant)

## Enabling Positron Assistant

Positron Assistant is not enabled by default. Follow these steps to enable it:

1. In the Command Palette, run the command `Preferences: Open User Settings (JSON)` to open your `settings.json` file

1. To enable everything Positron Assistant-related, add the following to your `settings.json`:

    ```{.json filename="settings.json"}
    "positron.assistant.enable": true,
    ```

    - `positron.assistant.enable`: Enables Positron Assistant. 

1. Save the `settings.json` file.

>     - The options are greyed out as `Unknown Configuration Setting`s because they are currently "hidden" config settings.

Reviewer: We now have the ability to make special links to open up straight to a setting in Positron. Do this like so:

```
[`positron.assistant.enable` or whatever text you want to show](positron://settings/positron.assistant.enable)
```

See an example of how we can use these here: <https://positron.posit.co/r-installations.html#customizing-r-discovery>

1. Restart Positron or run the `Developer: Reload Window` command in the Command Palette.

1. Positron Assistant is now enabled!

> 1. Click on the chat robot icon in the sidebar, or run the `Chat: Open Chat in Sidebar` command in the Command Palette to open the chat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click on the chat robot icon in the sidebar, or run the _Chat: Open Chat in Sidebar_ command in the Command Palette to open the chat.
```

We use italics for commands.

Currently, Positron Assistant uses a bring-your-own API key model for Anthropic, so you'll need to get keys set up ahead of time and bring those into Positron. GitHub Copilot uses an OAuth flow for authentication, so you will need to have a GitHub account with Copilot enabled.

- **Chat model providers:** Anthropic Claude is available for sidebar chat and inline chat.
- **Inline code completion model providers:** only GitHub Copilot is available. Positron's status bar will show registered inline code completion providers in the robot icon tooltip in the bottom-right of the Positron window.

If you don't already have API keys or an account for these providers, see the [Language Model Provider API Keys](#language-model-provider-api-keys-authentication) section below for instructions on how to get them, before continuing with the steps below.

### Managing language model providers

Anthropic and GitHub Copilot are the currently supported language model providers for Positron Assistant. Anthropic Claude is available for sidebar chat and inline chat, while GitHub Copilot is available for inline code completions only.

#### Adding language model providers

> 1. Run the `Positron Assistant: Add Language Model` command to open the language model provider dialog. You can also click the "Add Language Model provider" button in the Positron Assistant chat area (note: the button may be collapsed within the `...` context menu).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Run the _Positron Assistant: Add Language Model_ command to open the language model provider dialog. You can also click the "Add Language Model provider" button in the Positron Assistant chat area (note: the button may be collapsed within the `...` context menu).
```

1. Select the model provider you want to add and authenticate with the API key or OAuth flow as required by the provider.

1. Once authenticated successfully, the "Sign in" button will change to "Sign out", and available models from the provider will be registered.

1. Click the "Done" button once you have added all the desired model providers. You can always come back to this dialog later to add or remove providers.

::: {.callout-tip}
There is a known issue on Mac that may occur when logging into a language model provider. If you see auth errors or keychain error notifications and cannot successfully use Positron Assistant, you may want to try the workaround in [this issue](https://github.com/posit-dev/positron/issues/7331).
:::

#### Removing language model providers

> 1. Run the `Positron Assistant: Add Language Model` command to open the language model dialog. You can also click the "Add Language Model" button in the Positron Assistant chat area (note: the button may be collapsed within the `...` context menu).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Run the _Positron Assistant: Add Language Model_ command to open the language model dialog. You can also click the "Add Language Model" button in the Positron Assistant chat area (note: the button may be collapsed within the `...` context menu).
```

1. Select the model provider you want to remove.

1. Click the "Sign out" button to remove the provider from Positron Assistant.

1. Click the "Done" button to close the dialog.

## Using Positron Assistant

### Chat pane

> Click on the chat robot icon in the sidebar, or run the `Chat: Open Chat in Sidebar` command in the Command Palette to open the chat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click on the chat robot icon in the sidebar, or run the _Chat: Open Chat in Sidebar_ command in the Command Palette to open the chat.
```

> Assistant's Chat pane (in the Activity Panel by default) knows about your R and Python console session inputs/outputs, in-memory objects and dataframes as available in the variables pane, and can look at the Plots pane too, if instructed. The user can attach files via the @ icon in or drag files as attachments to ask questions about specific files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assistant's Chat pane (in the Activity Panel by default) has access to your R and Python console session inputs/outputs, as well as in-memory objects and dataframes as available in the variables pane. Assistant can look at the Plots pane too, if instructed. The user can attach files via the <kbd>@</kbd> icon or drag files as attachments to ask questions about specific files.
```

Code generated by Assistant can be run in the Console, copied to the clipboard, or sent to the Editor via controls attached to code output blocks.

#### Slash commands

Slash commands provide quick access to common tasks without writing long prompts. Start by typing / in the chat box to see available commands. For example, the `/quarto` command converts the current chat conversation into a Quarto document.

#### Chat participants

> Chat participants provide specialized knowledge to the Positron Assistant. You can add a chat participant by typing `@` in the Chat pane then the chat participant name. Please reference the [Shiny Assistant](#shiny-assistant) section for more information on the use of a Shiny chat participant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chat participants provide specialized knowledge to the Positron Assistant. You can add a chat participant by typing `@` in the Chat pane plus the chat participant name. Please reference the [Shiny Assistant](#shiny-assistant) section for more information on the use of a Shiny chat participant.
```

### Inline chat

> The command _Inline Chat: Editor Inline Chat_ (default keybinding: Cmd + I) will open a mini chat right in the editor. This is very useful for asking questions in context, and also includes a good UX for integrating changes suggested by the model.

Reviewer: We try to use `<kbd></kbd>` syntax for all keyboard buttons, so:

```
<kbd>Ctrl/Cmd</kbd>+<kbd>I</kbd>
```

### Completions

If GitHub Copilot is enabled and the user pauses typing for a few seconds, Positron Assistant will offer completions in most contexts. If it is not working, check the following:

- Make sure you have a [language model provider added](#adding-language-model-providers) for completions.

> - Check the DevTools Console logs to see if there are any errors logged. Run the `Developer: Toggle Developer Tools` command in the Command Palette to open DevTools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check the [developer tools console logs](troubleshooting.qmd#developer-tools) to see if there are any errors logged.
```

I _think_ that link format will work.

## Shiny Assistant

The Shiny Assistant is a chat participant available within Positron Assistant that provides context-aware assistance for developing Shiny applications in Python or R. It can help you with tasks such as generating Shiny UI components, server logic, and reactive expressions.

> The Shiny Assistant enhances the default prompt with additional information about Shiny that we have found improves the quality of generated apps and Shiny components. It is also kept up to date with the latest Shiny features and best practices, in a way that is not practical with foundational models or fine-tuning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Shiny Assistant enhances the default prompt with additional information about Shiny that we have found improves the quality of generated apps and Shiny components. It is also kept up to date with the latest Shiny features and best practices, in a way that is not practical with foundation models or fine-tuning.
```

The Shiny Assistant is available in the chat once you have installed the [Shiny extension](https://open-vsx.org/extension/posit/shiny). Like other chat participants, Shiny Assistant can be invoked by typing `@shiny` in the chat pane or inline chat, followed by your question or request related to Shiny development.

## Language model provider API keys & authentication

> ::: {.callout-tip}
> Since you may need to access these API keys multiple times, we recommend storing them in a password manager such as 1Password, or another secure location.
> :::
> 

Reviewer 2: I think we can remove this since we provide this guidance in the Anthropic section. This tip doesn't apply to the Copilot flow.

```suggestion
```

### Anthropic Claude

If you have an Anthropic account, you should be able to get an API key from the [Anthropic Console](https://console.anthropic.com/) on the [admin keys page](https://console.anthropic.com/settings/admin-keys).

> Copy and save the API key to 1Password or another password manager. This key will be used to authenticate to Anthropic in the language model dialog.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Copy and save the API key to a password manager or another secure location. This key will be used to authenticate to Anthropic in the language model dialog.
```

::: {.callout-note}
Note that the available models in Positron are:

* Claude 3.5 Sonnet v1
* Claude 3.5 Sonnet v2
* Claude 3.7 Sonnet
* Claude 4 Sonnet
* Claude 4 Opus

:::

### GitHub Copilot

> If you have a Github account with Copilot enabled, you can authenticate to GitHub Copilot in Positron Assistant in the language model dialog. The authentication flow will open up a browser and direct you to sign into Github. Once authenticated, Copilot will be available for inline code completions only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have a Github account with Copilot enabled, you can authenticate to GitHub Copilot in Positron Assistant via the language model dialog. The authentication flow will open up a browser and direct you to sign into Github. Once authenticated, Copilot will be available for inline code completions only.
```
